#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language british
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
CSE551 Assignment #3
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Short Review of Domain Decomposition Method
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Mustafa Kutay Yabaş
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
December 3, 2016
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Domain Decomposition is a divide and conquer method used to solve numerical
 problems.
 Most importantly it allows for parallel computing in large problems by
 dividing the problem into subdomains.
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "cai2003overlapping"

\end_inset

 Then each subproblem is solved in its subdomain where the solutions are
 merged together at the end.
 It is flexible and efficient in its nature and applicable to a large variety
 of problems.
 It allows numerical solutions for irregular shapes or usage of different
 computational approaches in different subdomains.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
While there are different methods of Domain Decomposition (DD), overlapping
 DD is easy to implement and has an intuitive setup.
 As an example application we can explain the solution of Laplacian equation
 with finite difference method.
 In the finite difference method we create a hypothetical stencil or a grid,
 then calculate the value of the each cell of the grid depending on the
 differences of the neighbouring cells.
 The numbers of the required neighbours increase by increasing orders of
 derivatives and accuracy.
 So if we slice the whole grid into sub-grids we should also consider the
 required neighbours.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Laplacian is a 
\begin_inset Formula $2^{nd}$
\end_inset

 order derivative and if we want to solve the equation with finite difference
 method with 
\begin_inset Formula $1^{st}$
\end_inset

 order accuracy then we need at least one neighbouring cell.
 So if we create a 
\begin_inset Formula $10\times10$
\end_inset

 grid and want to solve the problem in 4, 
\begin_inset Formula $5\times5$
\end_inset

 sub-grids, in practice the grids should be 
\begin_inset Formula $6\times6$
\end_inset

.
 The solution of the 
\begin_inset Formula $5\times5$
\end_inset

 matrix will require the information of 
\begin_inset Formula $6^{th}$
\end_inset

 row and column or other corresponding columns for other sub-grids.
 So the overlapping parts are these excess columns and rows in each sub-grid.
 They are not calculated and can be omitted when the sub-grids are merged
 at the end.
 So a large 
\begin_inset Formula $N\times N$
\end_inset

 matrix can be divided into smaller sub-grids, each sub-grid can be computed
 in parallel to be merged later.
 The only disadvantage is the excess rows and columns present in every sub-grid
 causing increased memory usage but it is an efficient trade of in return
 of decreased computing time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A very efficient case will be a problem with emerging patterns or cyclic
 functions.
 Instead of recalculation of repeated patterns one can slice the grid wisely
 then just solve the one of a kind grids and duplicate the solutions to
 fill the pattern.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My area of research includes extensive usage of Monte Carlo methods for
 simulations, sampling and inference.
 A similar approach like in domain decomposition model may be beneficial
 for parallelisation of the simulations processes to obtain more samples
 in the same unit of time.
 However the overlaps are not predefined in a Monte Carlo solution as the
 process is based on randomness.
 In the course of computation, events that pass the boundaries of the subdomains
 may arise and they should be sent between threads asynchronously.
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "brunner2009efficient"

\end_inset

 This results in threads waiting for each other and messages to be transmitted
 which decreases the true benefits of parallel computing.
 So the trade off may be bigger in the Monte Carlo case compared to deterministi
c problems.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another problem is to attain independent randomness between threads.
 Order of execution or other dependencies between threads will probably
 introduce autocorrelation and introduce a randomisation bias in the problem
 which degrades the whole benefits of using Monte Carlo methods.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There surely are methods to eliminate biases in the above-mentioned, however
 in practice it is a more common approach to run separate instances of the
 entire Monte Carlo problem in independent threads then combine the results.
 After all the solution is a random sample of the population and different
 random samples merged together continue to be random.
 On the other hand if the single Monte Carlo thread converges very slowly
 this approach is not desirable.
 So domain decomposition methods are efficient to overcome slow, non-uniform
 convergence of variables and high memory requirements in high dimensional
 simulations.
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "wagner2011hybrid"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In conclusion domain decomposition methods are beneficial in some cases
 of Monte Carlo methods and can be used to increase the speed of convergence
 of the variables to their expected values.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Title
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
bibfiles "domain-decomposition"
options "plain"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
